---
title: How to Get to OT... Part 1
date: 2019-01-17
content_type: blog-post
---
There is no one right answer.

I have been an occupational therapist for [4 years](/posts/where-did-four-years-go) and just started my 5th year as a practitioner (which sounds a little crazy to me, to be honest). I have supervised MOT Fieldwork I students, OTA Fieldwork II students, undergraduate students (Exercise Physiology students on a semester-long practicum in an exercise-related health field) who are on the road to OT; worked with many other new grads, both OTs and OTAs; and have worked with and been mentored by many seasoned occupational therapists and occupational therapy assistants, who are well on the road to retiring and transitioning away from OT. Some have been practitioners for longer than I've been alive, and have seen many changes to our education, evidence-based practice, policy, promotion, and ability to advocate for the populations we serve. When I started my grad school application process, the entry-level degree was (and still is) a Master's degree. I have a Master's of Occupational Therapy (MOT). Not long ago (as recently as 15 years) you could get your Bachelor of Science in Occupational Therapy. There is current debate around [mandating a move](https://www.aota.org/Education-Careers/Accreditation/acote-doctoral-mandate-2027.aspx) to Doctor of Occupational Therapy (OTD) as the entry-level degree. I'm not going to get into that.

I can only talk about my road to Occupational Therapy, which like a lot of my fellow practitioners, was not a straight one. The road has changed and is currently changing, especially on the education front. Here is my "Autobiographical Essay" I wrote in 2012 for my grad school application. I was applying to particular program (that doesn't exist anymore) that would allow me to get my MOT and DPT in 10 trimesters (less than 3.5 years), by first getting my MOT, and then taking all the PT treatment classes (without repeating all the shared science classes). I just wanted to learn all the things! I was accepted into this "dual degree" program, with a scholarship. That's why I'm talking about physical therapy and occupational therapy together in this essay. (In 2014, I ended up making the choice to not complete the DPT part, because I loooooooove OT so much. That's another story for another day, involving a lot of guilt and self-doubt, but like I said: not a straight road.)

"I was fourteen years old and playing in a club basketball tournament at the end of my freshman year of high school.  It was the first game of the first summer tournament and there was a lot to look forward to in the coming summer season.  Late in the game, I was chasing down a loose ball, trying to save it from going out-of-bounds (or worse—into the opposing team’s hands).  When I got pushed full-force, two hands on my back, into the opposing team’s bench, I knew that was the end of my game.
“I hyper-extended my knee!  I hyper-extended my knee!”  I screamed as I writhed in pain on the floor, upset that the referees had not even called a foul.
While I knew enough about the human body to know that I had hyper-extended my knee, I did not yet understand the extent of trauma that such an injury could cause.  At the end of the summer, after much back-and-forth between my primary care doctor and orthopedists, I learned that I had torn the ACL in my left knee and would not be able to play volleyball in the upcoming high school season.
I was devastated.

But, what turned out to be the worst thing I could think of at fifteen years old, opened my eyes to a new passion.  In the months after my initial injury, from the diagnosis, to the lead-up to surgery, then finally surgery and post-surgery, I saw three different orthopedic surgeons.  I felt confident that the surgeon who actually performed the surgery on my knee was more than capable, but there was never a feeling that any of these doctors would be with me through the entire process or that they even cared about what mattered to me—being able to play volleyball and basketball again.  It was disheartening.
Despite seeing three orthopedic surgeons, I saw the same physical therapist three times a week for more than six months.  It was that connection with my physical therapist that really helped me get through the rehabilitation process.  I felt like I had a whole team with me!  From the DPT to the techs to the receptionist, everyone cared about my goal to play my favorite sports again.  It was this positive and engaging experience with a devoted and caring physical therapist and her team that really inspired me to study the human body and become a therapist as well.

If you had asked me when I was a little girl what I wanted to be when I grew up, my quick response would have been, “I want to be a doctor or a teacher.”  As a young adult, I have realized that physical and occupational therapy marry the two professions perfectly.  On the “doctor” side, I will guide people along on their road to wellness, helping patients gain or regain mobility, strength, and motor control.  On the “teacher” side, I will give my patients the tools necessary to take their rehabilitation into their own hands and hopefully, in the process, they will also learn how to keep their body well for years to come.
In college, I knew what I had to do to get ready for the “doctor” side of being a therapist.  I took the right classes: from anatomy to exercise physiology to immunology, from infant development to child psychopathology to positive psychology, and every biology and psychology class in between.  It was not until I took a class called “Motor Learning and Control” as an elective that I realized that what I loved to do outside of classes was helping to prepare me for the “teacher” side of physical and occupational therapy.
At that point in my college career, I was in my 5th season of coaching middle school and high school volleyball, and was even teaching a ten-lesson swing dance series at a local high school.  Taking the Motor Learning class was an aha moment.  I told my self, “I know this.  I already do what I’m learning about!”  It was thrilling.  I did not know all the technical names for different theories of learning and processing, but that did not mean I did not recognize what I was learning.  Whether it was tips on how to give effective directions and demonstrations for various motor skills or simply how to employ the sandwich-method of providing feedback, I was excited that not only did I already have a grasp of the material, but that I could also apply it!
Of course, I did not start coaching just to prepare myself for being a therapist.  I was only seventeen and a senior in high school when I coached my first middle school volleyball season.  The connection between coaching and translating those skills into being a good therapist was far from my mind.  I coach because I love it.  I love volleyball. I love sharing something I love; I love the kids; and I love seeing my girls learn new skills and improve during each practice.  I hope to carry that same drive and passion into being a therapist.  I love the human body; I love learning about it and sharing that knowledge with people. I love working with others; and I love being a part of a patient’s improvement."
  
Wow, that was weird to read, about 7 years later. My road to OT started with personal injury, rehabilitation, a Bachelor of Science in Biology with a minor in Psychology, coaching volleyball, and getting involved in ballroom dance in college. In college, I shadowed OTs, OTAs, and PTs, for over 400 hours in 2 diverse settings: a school and outpatient orthopedic clinic. The connection I experienced during my own physical therapy rehabilitation, the one I was sure I could provide for my patients and clients, has stuck with me. I'm fairly confident that in most cases, I have provided that connection for my clients. In my first 3 years of practice, before we started traveling, I worked in a wonderful outpatient pediatric clinic. In a few cases, I saw the same kids, at the same time, every week, for all 3 years. (You don't just "grow out" of developmental disorders; it takes a lot of work and consistency to habilitate skills.) That's a lot of connection! In temporary travel placements, I've shared tears with patients and coworkers alike as I finish a contract. 

I have had a few high school seniors and college students ask to shadow me and also ask what kind of studies they should pursue to become an occupational therapist. That also isn't a straight road, and there isn't only one road to travel. Stay tuned for Part 2 for the answer to that question!