---
title: Seek and You Shall Be... A "Seeker"
date: 2015-04-09
content_type: blog-post
---
[In last week's post](/posts/its-that-time-of-the-year-again-april-is-ot-month/), I mentioned that at the end of only the second therapy session, a parent told me that she felt like she understood her daughter more. She is in kindergarten and is, compared to the rest of the family, very active. Since beginning occupational therapy intervention at the beginning of March (about a month ago), the family is able to enjoy more activities together instead of having every day tasks be a constant struggle. Grandma and mom report that reading homework goes faster because they are not constantly asking the daughter to sit down and pay attention. After doing a selection of yoga poses and the "steamroller" before bed, the bed time routine is easier. The little girl used to get out of bed 2 or 3 times after being put to bed. She doesn't get up anymore, and falls asleep much faster.

Sounds amazing, doesn't it? Did I sprinkle a little magic OT Fairy dust and call it good?

No. No, magic here. Well, if you consider "providing context" and "reframing behaviors" and "therapeutic use of self" to be magical, then yes, I sprinkled all the magic OT Fairy dust everywhere.

## Providing Context

During the evaluation period, the parents filled out the [Sensory Profile 2](http://www.pearsonclinical.com/therapy/products/100000822/sensory-profile-2.html#tab-details), an assessment that allows caregivers to report how their child acts or reacts in/during/around different situations and sensory input opportunities. It can give us the big picture of how a child is influenced by his or her ability to process (or not process, as the case may be) the information coming in through the senses (vision, hearing, tactile/touch, taste, smell, [proprioception](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proprioception), and [vestibular](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vestibular_system)) and his or her reactions, behavior, and conduct related to that input. Proprioception is your ability to sense where your body is in space based on the information from signals in your joints and muscles. The vestibular sense is related to balance, your ability to tell where your head is in space, how fast your body is moving, and in what direction (up, down, sideways, in circles) based on information from your inner ear.

I really like the way that my [boss](http://www.climbingtreetherapy.com/), who has been an OT for almost ten years, explains the senses and how we relate to the world with them. He says that the 5 senses we learn about in elementary school (seeing, hearing, touching, tasting, smelling) can often be disregulating. Disregulation means that sometimes input in these areas may be perceived as different or threatening, and can throw us off, or disorganize the way we try to make sense of input.

Can you feel your pants touching your legs? I bet now that you are thinking about it, you can feel your pants on your legs--the weight of the fabric, the texture, etc. But before I brought your attention back to it, you had habituated to it. The nerves that are receiving touch sensations in your skin still send that message to your brain, but your brain stopped listening a long time ago. Imagine if it didn't do that, and you were always aware of your clothes on your body. That would probably be a little annoying and take away a lot of processing power from the other things our brains do every day. Good thing our bodies are smarter than that.

Now, think about that one really itchy sweater you have. It's so warm, but man, it really bugs you if it touches your skin directly. To address that, you wear an undershirt. Or perhaps you gave the sweater away to a thrift store a lot time ago. Imagine, though, that every piece of clothing you owned was as itchy and uncomfortable as that sweater, and no matter what, you never habituated to wearing it. It's annoying. It's uncomfortable. You squirm. You scratch. This sensation of the sweater is disregulating.

That's just one example, using tactile sensation. All the other senses come into play, as well. High pitched sounds like sirens and warning bells are disregulating. They alarm and alert us (for good cause). Bad smells can let us know that food is rotten and dangerous. They also may make you feel queasy.

If there is disregulation, there must be regulation, right? My boss explains to parents that [vestibular](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vestibular_system) and [proprioceptive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proprioception) senses are largely regulating. This means they help get your body "just right." In this way, regulation can mean to calm you down, or speed you up, depending on how you are feeling, and what you need to do. There are many proprioceptors in the jaw. This is why chewing gum during a test can help regulate us, or relieve stress. Likewise, the proprioceptors in the muscles and joints of my hands and arms were very busy during my OT school tests, as I squeezed and pinched and pulled on a shark-shaped foam stress ball. I eventually ripped off his tail fin (oops), but it was much better than tapping on the table or wiggling my pencil around and annoying the other test-takers in the room. These are just two examples of how proprioception is regulating. Vestibular input can also be regulating. Think about a mom rocking her baby to sleep. This slow, rhythmical linear vestibular input is calming. We may also need to speed up to get to an appropriate arousal state. Sometimes, when I need to wake up, I'll go for a brisk walk or jog, or spin on the swing. That vestibular input is alerting, and helps to get me "just right."

## Reframing Behavior

Imagine you are cruising along, driving 65 miles per hour. The sun is shining, windows are down. It's a beautiful day to cruise. All of a sudden, you see flashing lights in your rear-view mirror. Oh no! The police pull you over for speeding in a 25 mph residential zone.

Did you imagine at first that you were driving 65 mph on the highway? The highway is the right road, or context, on which to drive that fast. Just as it is dangerous to drive 65 mph in a residential area, it would be dangerous to drive only 25 mph on the highway. It is the same way with our bodies. Above I talked about being "just right." What is just right, or required of me, depends on the context or situation. It would be wrong for the context if my body was sluggish and slow when I want to be energized and ready to move and react during a volleyball game. By the same token, it would be wrong for the context or situation if I was skipping around during an important meeting when I am expected to sit down to show my respect to the presenter.

Things are a bit different for children who may only understand that their bodies feel like they are going 25 mph, but they really feel like they should be going 65 mph. They want to do something to get up to highway speeds. To many people on the outside, including parents and other adults, the child's behaviors (attempts to get up to highway speeds) may look like the kid is really going at NASCAR speeds. This is where OT can come in to give the child better ways to get their body "just right" without being disruptive to family time or classroom environment. This is also where OT can give meaning to the attempt to get up to speed. For the mom in my story, this seemed to be an ah-ha moment. "You mean," she asked, "my daughter isn't running around or spinning on purpose and being bad?"

Many times, the behaviors adults see as acting out or not following the instructions to sit still, are really a child's attempts to self-regulate. If we reframe it as such, it makes much more sense. I'm not saying that every kid running in circles is trying to get his or her body right. Depending on the kid, he really could be doing it just to get a rise out of you. But for this little girl, she didn't know of any other way to feel "right." In addition to giving her behaviors a context, I had to reframe the expectations.

One complaint was that she wouldn't sit still for reading time every night (her only "homework" as a kindergartener). I pointed out that I rarely sit still when working at the computer. I shift in my seat a lot. Sometimes I have to get up an get a drink of water to give my brain a break. Five year-olds need to move too, and a lot more. Kids need to move and play! Our society has this strange idea that we need to be in a chair in a classroom for hours on end. Humans were not made to be this sedentary. (Don't even get me started on schools having to cut recess time to fit in more instructional time.)

Once the mom encouraged her daughter to ride her scooter or swing outside before school in the mornings, she was more focused at school. Allowing her to play outside before dinner meant that she stayed seated at the dinner table longer. To address not being able to sit still for reading time, I suggested that she shouldn't be expected to sit still. She's 5 years old. I still acknowledged the need for boundaries and expectations, though. So, instead of expecting her to sit still while reading to her, define an area (perhaps a carpet square or big pillow) that she has to be on during reading time. Within that space, she can stand, sit, lay, wiggle, rock side to side, etc. to get her body to be just right so she can listen better to the story. Caregiver's verdict after a week of modified reading area: it works!

## Therapeutic Use of Self

Part of being an OT is being open to sharing about myself and my experiences. In a lot of cases in working with children, therapeutic use of self means being who they need me to be. Of course, this means I need to be a detective, first. No little kid says to me, "Miss Andrea, I really would like for you to be more firm with routines and expectations with me. I need boundaries." It's all about reading the situation and getting to know the client. If they need a cheerleader, I have to get excited, and really encourage them during an activity. If they need those firmer boundaries, I have to use my firm voice (I'm still working on a lower, more serious tone, I'll be honest). Sometimes it means not showing any emotion or reaction in order to not encourage unwanted behaviors. (That one is really, really hard for me, but practice is making perfect.)

Other times, especially when trying to explain things to caregivers and parents, it means telling them that I am the same way. For this little girl's mom and grandparents, hearing that their daughter was not weird or necessarily abnormal, probably came as a relief. I would venture to say that finding out that a another "Seeker" (that's me!) is a productive and successful member of society was probably even more of a relief.

When I filled out the Sensory Profile in OT school, my scores were in the normal range on  registration, sensation avoiding, and sensory sensitivity. But scored I much higher than most people, 2 standard deviations above the norm, for sensation seeking. A Seeker! I particularly like sensory stimulation via movement (I am very active, love to dance, play many sports, and am often skipping) and taste (I enjoy spicy foods and many different cuisines, textures, and tastes). In addition, I am not dangerously impulsive. That is, despite these seeking behaviors, I am aware of potential dangers and avoid doing things like jumping off of ledges, running into traffic, spinning around into people and things, etc. This is something I often have to help children learn.

When I said: "Honestly, I know how it is to seek. I am a 'Seeker' like your daughter. But I am able to channel that into productive activities. I play volleyball on the weekends, kickball on Tuesday nights, I try to ride my bike when I can, and I love to ballroom dance. My job is to help your daughter find productive ways to seek without it getting in the way of her ability to complete functional tasks, like self-care routines or learning in the classroom," I was not expecting the next question.

"What does it feel like?" the grandma asked.

"Feel like?"

"Yeah, what does being a Seeker feel like?"

I filled out my Sensory Profile almost 2 years ago. That's quite a while to have known that I am a Seeker, but I never really had to explain it. I paused, searching for the right words. "When I need to 'seek', I feel anxious. It's not like I'm scared of not being able to move. But I get wound up and I need a release."

## Sensory Diet Tips

The examples I gave at the very beginning of this post (yoga poses and steamroller) are what we call "heavy work" or activities that provide proprioceptive input to joints and muscles. These are part of this little girl's sensory diet. Just like we need a balanced diet of food, we need balance to the sensory input we receive. 

To do the "steamroller" lay on your stomach with your arms out and flat like an airplane. Turn your head to one side (to put an ear on the ground) so your chin is not on the ground with your neck in hyperextension. Have a parent (or roommate or friend) roll a large exercise ball on your back, legs, and arms. Be sure to tell the roller if you want more or less pressure and where you want it. I particularly like the ball rolled around on my hands. When the ball is on my back, I like it to be pressed harder. 

The first time I did the steamroller in therapy with this little girl, I demonstrated it to her grandpa and had him try. As he rolled the big ball along her body, she sighed and breathed more deeply. Her posture changed and her body relaxed. It was like all the anxious movements and feelings all got smooshed out. When I asked the girl how it made her feel, she said, "sleepy." It is now a part of her bed time routine, and has been why she is able to go to sleep faster and not get up again. Swinging and riding the scooter in the morning provide vestibular and proprioceptive input for this girl. These are also her in her sensory diet.

Sensory diets do not need to be complicated, nor do they require extra equipment. When I need a release, I'll do chair push ups or push my hands together in front of me (it might look like I'm praying really aggressively). Chewing gum or fidgeting with my stress shark during tests helped me get through tests in OT school. 

Giving kids the power to be in charge of their sensory diets and the tools to implement strategies is so important. This buy-in can really make a difference. Victoria Nackley, OTR, and Deborah Marr, OTR, developed [Sensory Stories](http://www.utica.edu/faculty_staff/vnackley/index.cfm), a tool that teaches kids how to employ the strategies that are part of their sensory diet. [Her tool](http://www.sensorystories.com/) is backed up by a lot of research, which you can read about further on the website. Full disclosure: Mrs. Nackley is the mom of one of my best friends from OT school. It was awesome that she came from New York to Florida to present at one of our Student Occupational Therapy Association meetings! 

For further information, check out [this simple tool](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1nJSPSv2GtfRUPyBDoWtx64emBuL8zQSV5JqSIoUqbmY/viewform?embedded=true) to get ideas about your own self-regulation needs and personal strategies to address them. It was made by another long-time OT, Angie Voss, OTR; you can check out [her website](http://asensorylife.com/index.html). My fieldwork [supervisor](http://powellpediatrictherapy.com/) in California utilized a lot of Angie Voss' ideas during treatment sessions.

## Happy OT Month!

Thanks for reading! Writing certainly helps me solidify why I do what I do and how to explain it in the best ways! Make sure you check out the links in the post; my intent is to make them as informative as possible. Please feel free to ask questions in the comments. And to celebrate OT Month, enter here for a chance to win an OT-Rex shirt. (Or don't. The fewer entries, the better my chances are, right? Wink wink.)