---
date: 2019-01-09
title: What I do When I Get to a New Town
content_type: blog-post
---

In 2018, as travel therapists (and unemployed travel therapists between contracts), we had the opportunity to be in 6 different cities and towns, for anywhere from 2 weeks to 5 months.

Moving around a lot can be stressful. Once you feel like you can get somewhere without using GPS--poof!--you're off to the next place! But, it's also rewarding. We have seen more of the country in a year than most people see in a life time. A lot of that is the road-tripping between assignments... but what about when you get to a new town? How can you learn the most about your temporary "home"?

At a minimum, I have done the following in all the new places we've had assignments. You may find that other things help you, obviously, but these were important to me.
Find out what the local public radio station is. You can tune it on your phone, laptop, Alexa, and/or car radio. Sometimes the traffic reports don't make sense because you don't actually know the names of the roads yet, but local weather, events, and news is really nice to know. It's neat to find out what's important to the people in your temporary place of residence. I have learned quite a bit about local history, museums that are having special events, and First Friday Art Walks! A simple place to start is by putting in the zip code here. I have been delightfully surprised by the programming coming from the local studios, some of which has a national reach!
Study a map. No, it doesn't have to be on paper. I looooove Google maps. Google maps has a cool feature where you can make your own private map. I used it extensively in my search for short-term housing for our first assignment (we needed to live in walking distance of at least one of our assignments since we only have one car--talk about logistics!). I have used it since to "save" locations of grocery stores, churches, theaters, etc. I also like to save places that are within a 2-3 hour drive to go explore. Even if I never make it to a place, I like to save it as a option for something fun to do when we suddenly find that we got out of work early or the Director of Rehab calls you off because census is low. I recently found out from one of my favorite podcasts, ChooseFI, that this is called Planned Spontaneity. Also, updating your temporary "home" and "work" addresses can be helpful and safe for hands-free directions. I don't know how many times I've turned the wrong way leaving the grocery store, and had to say, "Okay Google, navigate home." Haha!
Ask your new coworkers where they grocery shop. Find out where they get gas. Is there a loyalty card for a grocery store that has good gas discounts? Locals know! I've found that my Smith's card from my hometown still works with all the Krogers stores and stations, and select Shell stations, and I was still able to build and use gas points.
Look up churches in your area, if that's your thing. Google Maps is also good for this. If you're Catholic, you can put in the zip code here, and sort by distance, time, language, etc. So helpful! We attended Mass at no fewer than probably 20 different churches in 2018, due to traveling on the weekends and trying to find a service with good music (I left an amazing choir and singing is important to me). The first church we went to on our first contract, happened to be having a pancake breakfast afterwards. We went, sat down at a table with other young people, and starting talking. We never saw those people again, but through their friends, we were able to find out about other churches and young adult groups. Having a "church home" or at least something that is consistent kind of helps lessen that "lost" feeling, at least for me.
For other traveling healthcare providers out there: what do you do when you find out where your next assignment is? Do you become a tourist in your new town or mainly use it as a jumping off point for weekend trips? As we prepare to go somewhere new in the spring, I want to know. :)

PS. These tips also helped me when I was on my Level II Fieldwork in Texas and California in 2014 (coming from school in Florida). OT students: 12 weeks is a great amount of time to really immerse yourself in some cool local fun and food! PT students: I know most of your internships are 8 weeks long, but you can do it, too! 